Export PPL Command docs from SQL plugin repo (#11688)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _sql-and-ppl/ppl/commands/streamstats.md

---
layout: default
title: streamstats
parent: Commands
grand_parent: PPL
nav_order: 39
---

# streamstats

The `streamstats` command calculates cumulative or rolling statistics as events are processed in order. Unlike `stats` or `eventstats` which operate on the entire dataset at once, `streamstats` processes events incrementally, making it suitable for time-series and sequence-based analysis.

> Key features include support for `window` (sliding window calculations) and `current` (whether to include the current event in calculations) parameters, and specialized use cases such as identifying trends or detecting changes over sequences of events.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Key features include support for the `window` (sliding window calculations) and `current` (whether to include the current event in calculations) parameters and specialized use cases such as identifying trends or detecting changes over sequences of events.  
```

  
## Comparing `stats`, `eventstats`, and `streamstats`

The `stats`, `eventstats`, and `streamstats` commands can all generate aggregations such as average, sum, and maximum. However, they differ in how they operate and the results they produce. The following table summarizes these differences.

| Aspect | `stats` | `eventstats` | `streamstats` |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | Transformation behavior | Transforms all events into an aggregated result table, losing original event structure | Adds aggregation results as new fields to the original events without removing the event structure | Adds cumulative (running) aggregation results to each event as they stream through the pipeline |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Transformation behavior | Transforms all events into an aggregated result table, losing original event structure | Adds aggregation results as new fields to the original events without removing the event structure | Adds cumulative (running) aggregation results to each event as it streams through the pipeline |
```

| Output format | Output contains only aggregated values. Original raw events are not preserved | Original events remain, with extra fields containing summary statistics | Original events remain, with extra fields containing running totals or cumulative statistics |

> | Aggregation scope | Based on all events in the search (or groups defined by BY clause) | Based on all relevant events, then the result is added back to each event in the group | Calculations occur progressively as each event is processed; can be scoped by window |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Aggregation scope | Based on all events in the search (or groups defined by the `by` clause) | Based on all relevant events, then the result is added back to each event in the group | Calculations occur progressively as each event is processed; can be scoped by window |
```

| `<by-clause>` | Optional | Fields and expressions for grouping, including scalar functions and aggregation functions. The `span` clause can be used to split specific fields into buckets by intervals. Syntax: `by [span-expression,] [field,]...` If not specified, all events are processed as a single group and running statistics are computed across the entire event stream. |
| `<span-expression>` | Optional | Splits a field into buckets by intervals (maximum of one). Syntax: `span(field_expr, interval_expr)`. By default, the interval uses the field's default unit. For date/time fields, aggregation results ignore null values. Examples: `span(age, 10)` creates 10-year age buckets, and `span(timestamp, 1h)` creates hourly buckets. Valid time units are millisecond (`ms`), second (`s`), minute (`m`), hour (`h`), day (`d`), week (`w`), month (`M`), quarter (`q`), year (`y`). |

## Aggregation functions  

> The streamstats command supports the following aggregation functions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `streamstats` command supports the following aggregation functions:
```

* `COUNT` -- Count of values  
* `SUM` -- Sum of numeric values  
* `AVG` -- Average of numeric values  
* `MAX` -- Maximum value  
* `MIN` -- Minimum value  
* `VAR_SAMP` -- Sample variance  
* `VAR_POP` -- Population variance  
* `STDDEV_SAMP` -- Sample standard deviation  
* `STDDEV_POP` -- Population standard deviation  
* `DISTINCT_COUNT`/`DC` -- Distinct count of values  
* `EARLIEST` -- Earliest value by timestamp  
* `LATEST` -- Latest value by timestamp  

<!-- temporarily commented out because the functions section is not ported 

For detailed documentation of each function, see [Functions]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/sql-and-ppl/functions/#aggregate).

-->  

## Example 1: Calculate the running average, sum, and count of a field by group  

> The following query calculates the running average age, running sum of age, and running count of events for all accounts, grouped by `gender`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following query calculates the running average `age`, running sum of `age`, and running count of events for all accounts, grouped by `gender`:
```

  

## Example 2: Calculate the running maximum over a 2-row window

The following query calculates the running maximum age over a 2-row window, excluding the current event:
  
```sql
source=state_country
| streamstats current=false window=2 max(age) as prev_max_age
```
{% include copy.html %}
  
The query returns the following results:
  
| name | country | state | month | year | age | prev_max_age |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Jake | USA | California | 4 | 2023 | 70 | null |
| Hello | USA | New York | 4 | 2023 | 30 | 70 |
| John | Canada | Ontario | 4 | 2023 | 25 | 70 |
| Jane | Canada | Quebec | 4 | 2023 | 20 | 30 |
| Jim | Canada | B.C | 4 | 2023 | 27 | 25 |
| Peter | Canada | B.C | 4 | 2023 | 57 | 27 |
| Rick | Canada | B.C | 4 | 2023 | 70 | 57 |
| David | USA | Washington | 4 | 2023 | 40 | 70 |
  

## Example 3: Global vs group-specific windows  

The `global` parameter takes the following values:

* `true`: A global window is applied across all rows, but the calculations inside the window still respect the by groups.
* `false`: The window itself is created per group, meaning each group gets its own independent window. 
  

> The following example uses a sample index containing the following data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example uses a sample index containing the following data:
```

| Peter | Canada | B.C | 4 | 2023 | 57 |
| Rick | Canada | B.C | 4 | 2023 | 70 |
| David | USA | Washington | 4 | 2023 | 40 |

The following examples calculate the running average of `age` across accounts by country, using a different `global` parameter.  

When `global=true`, the window slides across all rows in input order, but aggregation is still computed by `country`. The sliding window size is `2`:
  
```sql
source=state_country
| streamstats window=2 global=true avg(age) as running_avg by country
```
{% include copy.html %}
  
As a result, `David` and `Rick` are included in the same sliding window when computing `running_avg` across all rows globally:
  
| name | country | state | month | year | age | running_avg |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Jake | USA | California | 4 | 2023 | 70 | 70.0 |
| Hello | USA | New York | 4 | 2023 | 30 | 50.0 |
| John | Canada | Ontario | 4 | 2023 | 25 | 25.0 |
| Jane | Canada | Quebec | 4 | 2023 | 20 | 22.5 |
| Jim | Canada | B.C | 4 | 2023 | 27 | 23.5 |
| Peter | Canada | B.C | 4 | 2023 | 57 | 42.0 |
| Rick | Canada | B.C | 4 | 2023 | 70 | 63.5 |
| David | USA | Washington | 4 | 2023 | 40 | 40.0 |
  

> In contrast, when `global=false`, each `by` group forms its own independent stream and window:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, when `global=false`, each `by` group forms an independent stream and window:
```
